---
layout: post
title: "Interviewing is a Two Way Street"
date: 2014-01-04 20:03
comments: true
categories: [recruiting, interviewing]
---

## Why Interviews Suck

If you read my last post you know that I do a LOT of interviewing.  I enjoy it and love the
conversations that transpire.  The problem is that most interviews are a horrible experience for
everyone involved.  As a candidate you have to do the mind numbing walk through of everywhere you
ever worked because no who is interviewing you bothered to read your resume.  As a panel member, you
get candidates who just show up thinking their mere presence grants them a job.  Crazy from both
sides!

<!--more-->

Lately I have had quite a few discussions with folks on what makes a successful interview?  How do
you learn the most about a candidate?  What are we trying to accomplish with the interview?  As a
candidate, how can I show them I am really the right person for the job?  In this post, I am going
to share a few guidelines for both sides I think lead to a great interview.

## The Worst Experience Ever

Years ago when I was working at <a href="http://www.verticalresponse.com"
target="_blank">VerticalResponse</a>, I was part of an interview panel for a prospective engineer.
There were 6 of us and the candidate crammed into a tiny conference room where we started off with
the proverbial _tell us about your background_ question because none of us had read his resume or
prepared for the interview.  The candidate started to share his experience and soon enough we were
asking him questions.  Smelling fear, we started to circle around this guy like a pack of blood
thirsty sharks, asking him questions that soon because apparent were above his skill level.  It got
hotter and hotter in the room and soon the candidate started to sweat profusely.

Most normal people at this point take pause and ask the person if they need a break or some water.
Not us!  We kept asking more difficult questions and kept drilling this guy like nobody's business.
We put him in front of a white board and asked him to design a database for a library problem that
was our stock question. It was customary to then get into details about standard CRUD operations
that would be performed against the design including possible optimizations.  He was doing poorly
but we didn't stop asking him questions.  We just kept asking, drilling deeper, and further
humiliating the guy until it was embarrassing.

Not satisfied with our established pedestal we jumped right in to our environment and vernacular
asking him detailed questions about how he would solve a prospective problem.  Then, like Keith
Hernandez in the <a href="http://youtu.be/Lr0ggLKhH1I" target="_blank">kissing scene</a>, we asked
ourselves how could this guy not quickly understand our rpm based deployment system?  What kind of
novice are we interviewing?  Why is he sweating so much?  How smart are we, right?  We are really
smart!  Man, he is really sweating a lot.  

## Don't Pat Yourself on the Back

Have you ever been a part of this type of experience?  I can remember after we merciless ended the
interview and walked "sweaty guy" out, talking with team and praising our process.  We exposed that
guy didn't we?  We were all thumbs down saying what a loser the guy was.  To this day looking back,
I actually feel really bad for the guy.  I wish I remembered his name because I would go back and
apologize to him for being a righteous ass, even after all of these years.


- avoid context
- put candidate in a comfortable environment

## Avoid 



