---
layout: post
title: "My First Hand Experience with Sexism"
date: 2014-02-12 20:25
comments: true
categories: 
---

## What to do?

It's true.  I had a first hand experience with sexism that was so blatant and offensive, I didn't
know what to do in the moment.  I'll give the full details in the core of this post but for now I
want you to ask yourself, what would you do?  Would you stand up and shout?  Would you cower and
wither and just let the situation proceed?  Would you find the courage to speak up?

<!--more-->

## Tell me the story!

I'll get right to it.  I was interviewing with a company recently who reached out to me based on my
experience in the industry.  We weren't really sure what role I would fill but after a great
conversation with the CTO I agreed to come in for an in person interview with more members of the
management team.

Long story short I was meeting with the CTO and President of the company.  The interview was pretty
standard to this point and moving along.  Basic questions and general management questions were
being discussed.  After about an hour the CTO invited the CEO to join us.  Usually a good sign at
this point that things are moving along well.

The CEO seemed nice enough when we first shook hands.  Pleasantries were exchanged and then right
out of the gate it happened.  His first question to me:

> "Do you wonder why there are no women on the management team at a company for women?"

Wait, what?  Did he really just ask that question?  Before I could even get a word out about how it
wasn't the first thing on my mind he shares this gem:

> "Women are incapable of making the tough decisions necessary to run a profitable company on low
> margins."

He didn't stop there believe it or not.  I had no time to react or chime in because he just kept
going.  He was almost shouting out me for the next 5-10 minutes as he rambled on and on defending
his initial position that women were incapable.

You should know this about me.  I don't do well around _alpha males_.  I personally think saying
your an _alpha male_ is as inexcusable justification for being an asshole.  I don't have time for it
and don't want to be associated with people like this.  I choose to lead by example and just quietly
walk away and ignore these people rather than argue or fight back.

Now you understand while he was ranting I didn't say anything.  I just sat there, first completely
stunned, then waiting patiently and politely for him to finish.  It was easy to surmise this guy was
a complete jerk and resolved in my mind the interview was over and I would never work for this
company.

The moment finally came where he shut up and he asked me if I had any questions.  Normally I would
go into my list but I just politely said, "Nope, no questions from me but I do need to go to the
bathroom."  He gave me a funny look, and I proceeded to get up as the CTO was giving me directions
to the restroom.  He walked around the table and in front of me, put out his hand and shared it was
nice to meet me and thanked me for coming in.

> "What an ass", I thought as he held out a hand that I wouldn't shake

I said it was nice to meet him but I didn't shake his hand and proceeded to walk out of the room.

## What the hell just happened?



I really don't know where to start with this post.  What I am going to share will be shocking and
infuriating to many.  To others it will be a very familiar experience they deal with on a daily
basis which is nothing but sad.  After much thought I have decided to share this story so that in
some way I might make a small impact and hope for this to never happen again.  It will no less and
the perpetrators will continue to be sexist and do what they did with me.

