---
layout: post
title: "The Supportive Interview"
date: 2014-01-17 22:02
comments: true
categories: [recruiting, interviewing]
---

## Why Interviews Suck

If you have read my last few posts you know that I do a LOT of interviewing.  I enjoy it and love
the conversations that transpire.  The problem is that most interviews are a horrible experience for
everyone involved.  As a candidate you have to do the mind numbing walk through of everywhere you
ever worked because no who is interviewing you bothered to read your resume.  As a panel member, you
get candidates who just show up thinking their mere presence grants them a job.  Crazy from both
sides!

<!--more-->

Lately I have had quite a few discussions with folks on what makes a successful interview?  How do
you learn the most about a candidate?  What are we trying to accomplish with the interview?  As a
candidate, how can I show them I am really the right person for the job?  In this post, I am going
to share a few guidelines for hiring managers that I think lead to a great interview.  If you are
candidate, you can read this and if you find an experience like the one I describe, you can be
better prepared.

## The Sweaty Guy

Years ago when I was working at <a href="http://www.verticalresponse.com"
target="_blank">VerticalResponse</a>, I was part of an interview panel for a prospective engineer.
There were 6 of us and the candidate crammed into a tiny conference room where we started off with
the proverbial _tell us about your background_ question because not all of us had read his resume or
prepared for the interview.  The candidate started to share his experience and soon enough we were
asking him questions.  Smelling fear, we started to circle around this guy like a pack of blood
thirsty sharks, asking him questions that soon because apparent were above his skill level.  It got
hotter and hotter in the room and then the poor candidate started to sweat profusely from the heat
and the pressure of the situation.

Normal people at this point take note, show some empathy, and ask the person if they need a break or
some water.  Not us!  We kept asking more difficult questions and kept drilling this guy like
nobody's business.  We put him in front of a white board and asked him to design a database for a
library problem that was one of our stock questions. It was customary to then get into details about
standard CRUD operations that would be performed against the design including possible
optimizations.  He was doing poorly but we didn't stop asking him questions.  We just kept asking,
drilling deeper, and further humiliating the guy until it was embarrassing.

Not satisfied with our established pedestal, we jumped right in to our environment and vernacular,
asking him detailed questions about how he would solve a prospective problem.  Then, like Keith
Hernandez in the <a href="http://youtu.be/Lr0ggLKhH1I" target="_blank">kissing scene</a>, we asked
ourselves how could this guy not quickly understand our rpm based deployment system?  What kind of
novice are we interviewing?  Why is he sweating so much?  How smart are we, right?  We are really
smart!  Man, he is really sweating a lot.  

## Don't Pat Yourself on the Back

Have you ever been a part of this type of experience?  For the sake of every candidate out there, I
hope not.  I can remember after we merciless ended the interview and he was walked out and wished
well.  When I got back he was already nicknamed _sweaty guy_.  To this day looking back, I actually
feel really bad for him.  I wish I remembered his name because I would go back and apologize to him
for being an ass, even after all of these years.

After it was over we all sat in the room talking about how great our process was.  We exposed that
guy didn't we?  We were all thumbs down saying what a loser the guy was.  The reality of the
situation was that we spent most of the time just spending time on ourselves, showing how _smart_
we were.  We spent so much time patting each other on the back that we never gave the guy any chance
to truly share his experience or learn anything about us.

## Put the Candidate at Ease

A few years after that experience I became a hiring manager again.  I learned very quickly that one
of the key practices of a good interview was to put the candidate in an environment where they will
be successful and supported.  Let's be honest and understand that interviewing can be a nerve
wracking experience, especially for prospective female engineers.

Candidates want to impress yet they have no idea what you are going to ask them.  The canvas is wide
open.  The following are some tricks I have learned over the years for having a successful technical
interview:

* _Share the Agenda_ - One of the first things I do in any interview is to first tell the candidate
  what we are going to do.  Just like any meeting go over the agenda so they know what to expect and
  reaffirm who they are going to talk to.  It just makes it easier and helps make them comfortable.

* _Use their Editor_ - If you are doing a pairing exercise, ask them before they come in what editor
  they like to use and make sure it is installed on the machine you are going to use.  This way you
  spend time working on code together rather than wasting time having them relearn all the keyboard
  shortcuts.  

* _Use Their Preferred Language_ - Candidates often know several languages so make sure you identify
  which is their preferred language and test them in it.

* _Allow Google_ - Allow them to use google during the technical interview and explain to them it is
  OK to look things up.  We do it all the time in our job, so why should interviewing be any
  different?  This is not about rote memorization and besides, I am old, so my memory registers in
  the head are diminishing.  If I can't look up method signatures and documentation, I surely fail
  the test.  Does that mean I can't write good code?  Hardly!

## Avoid Context

Conventional wisdom suggests that we want to put people on the job before they start as a good way
to test if their skills and experience will work.  The caveat to this is how far the candidate is
removed from your context.  When I did my pairing exercise at ModCloth, I was given 90 minutes to
build a product shots service.  I knew it was going to be a long exercise when my first question to
<a href="https://twitter.com/richardiux" target="_blank">@richardiux</a> was, "What is a product
shot?".

A few things on context to keep in mind:

* _Provide Background_ - Understand how far your engineers are from the edge of the product.  If
  they are far from the edge, meaning it is not an engineering driven role, then make sure your
  candidate gets plenty of background.

* _Use a Kata_ - Try using a <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kata_(programming)"
  target="_blank">kata</a> to learn about their skills.  I was so inspired by this idea I developed
  a <a href="https://github.com/wbailey/kata" target="_blank">ruby gem</a> that we use for our
  pairing test.

## Choose Your Panel Wisely

This is an important aspect 

## The Two Way Street

The whole point of all this was to make sure that in the end you provide a two way street of
communication in the interview.  This way the candidate learns about you and you learn about the
candidate



